\newpage  

**About the BITAG**  

The Broadband Internet Technical Advisory Group (BITAG) is a non-profit, multi-stakeholder organization focused on bringing together engineers and technologists in a Technical Working Group (TWG) to develop consensus on how the Internet operates including broadband network management practices and other related technical issues that can affect users’ Internet experience, including the impact to and from applications, content and devices that utilize the Internet.  

The BITAG’s mission includes: (a) educating policymakers on such technical issues; (b) addressing specific technical matters in an effort to minimize related policy disputes; and (c) serving as a sounding board for new ideas and network management practices. Specific TWG functions also may include: (i) identifying “best practices” by broadband providers and other entities; (ii) interpreting and applying “safe harbor” practices; (iii) otherwise providing technical guidance to industry and to the public; and/or (iv) issuing advisory opinions on the technical issues germane to the TWG’s mission that may underlie disputes concerning broadband network management practices.  

The BITAG Technical Working Group and its individual Committees make decisions through a consensus process, with the corresponding levels of agreement represented on the cover of each report. Each TWG Representative works towards achieving consensus around recommendations their respective organizations support, although even at the highest level of agreement, BITAG consensus does not require that all TWG member organizations agree with each and every sentence of a document. The Chair of each TWG Committee determines if consensus has been reached. In the case there is disagreement within a Committee as to whether there is consensus, BITAG has a voting process with which various levels of agreement may be more formally achieved and indicated. For more information please see the BITAG Technical Working Group Manual, available on the BITAG website at www.bitag.org.  

BITAG TWG reports focus primarily on technical issues, especially those with the potential to be construed as anti-competitive, discriminatory, or otherwise motivated by non-technical factors. While the reports may touch on a broad range of questions associated with a particular network management practice, the reports are not intended to address or analyze in a comprehensive fashion the economic, legal, regulatory or public policy issues that the practice may raise. BITAG welcomes public comment. Please feel free to submit comments in writing via email at comments@bitag.org.
